Sfrename - rename OS/2 special files and set attributes
Copyright Oct. 2, 1993 by Robert W. Babcock and WSS Division of DDC

                              Why rename?

OS/2 users may find it convenient or necessary to boot DOS to backup or
defragment their FAT-format hard disks.  Some tape drives do not work under
OS/2, and you wouldn't want to defragment the disk which OS/2 was booted from
even if OS/2 allowed you to do so because it has open files on it.

On a FAT disk, OS/2 creates two files with "funny" names: "EA DATA. SF" and
"WP ROOT. SF".  The first of these has read-only, hidden and system
attributes, the second hidden and system.  DOS backup and disk defragmenting
programs may choke on the embedded blanks in these names, or may ignore them
because of the attributes.  On alternate executions, sfrename changes the
blanks in these names to underscores and gives the files normal attributes
then changes the underscores back to blanks and restores the usual
attributes.  So, you can boot DOS, add underscores to the names of the
special files, backup or defragment, remove the underscores and return to
OS/2.  Note that all of these functions except putting the blanks back in
the file names can be performed using DOS commands and wildcards.

                                   Usage

Sfrename is a DOS program.  You must boot DOS to use it because OS/2 won't
let you rename its special files.  Just switch to the appropriate disk and
type SFRENAME to run the program, it takes no arguments.  It looks at the
files in the root directory of the current drive to decide which way to do
the renaming. It also checks that one of the two expected combinations of
files exists, and does nothing if files are missing or extra files are
present.

One other thing you might want to do before starting a backup or defragging
is to delete SWAPPER.DAT.  OS/2 will recreate this file, and it does not hold
any useful information across reboots.  Backing it up or defragmenting it
would be a waste of time.  Return to OS/2 promptly after defragging so that
contiguous disk space is available for the recreated SWAPPER.DAT.

                      Defragmenting considerations

EA DATA. SF holds "extended attributes" for files.  I have seen claims that
OS/2 attempts to put the fragments of EA DATA. SF near the associated files,
so defragmenting it may harm rather improve performance.  On the other hand,
defragmenting files may move them far away from their original position, so
this argument is suspect.  In any case, defragmenting EA DATA. SF does not
seem to break anything.  Another claim, which I do believe, is that since
OS/2 uses previously unused fields in the directory to store pointers to
entries in EA DATA. SF, a defragmenting program which seems fine under DOS
could fail to preserve these fields and thus effectively destroy the extended
attributes irregardless of whether EA DATA. SF is moved.  Supposedly, very
old versions of Norton Speeddisk suffer from this problem, but modern
versions are ok, as are most other defragmenters.  Unfortunately, I don't
know of any safe way of testing whether a defragmenter is safe.

                         Other hidden OS/2 files

OS/2 creates several other hidden files in the root directory of a FAT boot
drive.  Sfrename does not do anything with these because I fear that the
names and number of files may change with future OS/2 releases.  If
necessary, the DOS attrib command can be used to make these files visible.

                                 License

You are granted an unlimited license to use Sfrename on any number of
computers.  You may modify the included Borland C 3.1 source code, but if you
distribute a modified version, you must modify the opening banner to display
both my original copyright and a message indicating that you have made
changes.  Sfrename is made available without charge, and without any
warranty.  BBS operators, online services and networked file archive sites
may make it available for download.  Public domain/shareware copying services
vendors may distribute Sfrename on floppy or CD-ROM disks or other media.

Robert W. Babcock
WSS Division of DDC
4 Reeves Road
Bedford, MA  01730
617-275-1183
Internet: babcock@cfa.harvard.edu
       or rbabcock@bix.com
WSS/DDC tech support BBS: 617-275-5834  14,400 baud, v.32bis, 24 hours
                          Home of Wssindex disk cataloger
